Staff who did the work. And that's Ethan and
Evan.
nice to meet you all. So I'm Ethan McKenzie.
I led this piece of work as audit lead.
Flooding is New Zealand's most frequent natural hazard, and climate change is
projected to increase its frequency and severity.
Our performance audit of Waikato Regional Council and Tasman District Council
looked at how well these councils plan, fund and manage flood
protection infrastructure to mitigate the risk of flooding from lakes, rivers and
other inland bodies of water.
However, this report and its findings is also intended to highlight some good
practice and lessons learned to help all 23 councils responsible for flood
protection to improve how they manage that activity.
To clarify our scope, the flood protection and control works activity, which is
what we looked at for each of these councils, does not include coastal flooding or
coastal erosion mitigation.
So the headline findings from this report are that each council is in slightly
different places when it comes to information they hold about flood protection
infrastructure and how they prioritize and plan work on that
infrastructure.
Waikato Regional Council is in a generally good place on that front, while Tasman
District Council has some more work to do to ensure they have good asset
information and more systematic prioritization and planning.
Happy to answer more questions about that if the committee has any.
We also recommended that both councils improve their understanding of flood risk.
And when we say flood risk, we mean something quite specific.
So,
we saw that they both have a generally good understanding of
where it is likely to flood under different scenarios, so where the water will go
when a flood is likely to occur.
However, they only understand the likely impact of that flooding for some areas in
their region. So that includes the impact on people's lives and
livelihoods, as well as financial, economic, cultural and
environmental impacts.
We understand that that's not unique to these two councils, and
research indicates that risk is not consistently well understood
nationwide.
But this is important because flood protection requires quite significant
investment. Councils need good information about flood risks
and flood protection infrastructure to make well-informed trade-offs between cost
and risk.
And these trade-offs, if informed well, helps them make
sound investment
decisions,
and to protect people and property from flooding.
This is especially important given the cost pressures facing councils.
In particular, in their 2024 to '34 long-term plans, councils are planning
to borrow at historically high levels.
So in conclusion,
to manage flood protection infrastructure to mitigate flood risk effectively,
all councils responsible for flood protection need to, in our view,
firstly, understand the current and future flood risk for a range
of different flooding scenarios in their regions, including the projected impact of
climate change.
Secondly, understand and maintain their flood protection infrastructure, including
understanding the costs involved in achieving different options for intended levels
of service.
Thirdly, they need to inform their communities about flood risk,
intended and actual levels of service and costs, including through regular
proactive communication about the potential impact of flooding now and in the
future.
And fourthly, they need to understand their community's views on where they should
focus their flood protection efforts. So, happy to take questions.
Thank you. And
we have a question from Andy.
Thank you for that.
A number of areas of question. We're also dealing with the Emergency Management
bill at the moment. We've had a lot of submissions and certainly an area I'm really
interested in is trying to make sure that we use the information
that councils have got.
Also, I'd be interested in what insurers' information is that's fed into this
as well, in terms of saying, actually, don't put
more
infrastructure, more people in hazardous places unless you do it in a way
which you're acknowledging the flood risk and you're building
accordingly, higher floor levels, whatever else it might be.
But we also had discussion about what the role is for emergency
management authorities, which are the same people,
but also NEMA in actually saying,
"Don't go there" or, "Don't do it that way."
Are you confident that those people are actually part of
the game, part of the solution, or are they sitting off to the side
waiting for something to go wrong before they actually get involved?
The ambulance at the bottom of the cliff or the fence at the top.
Mm.
And the other bit is the ability in planning to be able to push
back on development interests, which might say, "Well, look, we want to go and put
something in this place. It's hazardous, but somebody else can pay that cost down
the track."
And we've seen that in spades in some parts of the country.
Sure.
So take your first question first.
Yeah.
As you say, for
one of the councils that we spoke to, Tasman, which is a smaller council, a unitary
authority-
Yes
... the staff who are involved in recovery are also the staff who do flood
protection.
I thought they might be.
And,
they certainly talk to us about the
resourcing pressure that back-to-back events can have on
business as usual. So it's very hard to plan proactively when you're constantly
responding to flooding events that
break flood banks and cause damage, and you're constantly in a mode of recovery.
And we know from recent information released by Tasman District
Council that they're expecting,
or staff said that they're expecting to be in recovery mode from the June and July
floods last year for at least another 18 to 24 months.
So that's one point I would say. In terms of emergency management and how that fed
into our audit, we didn't look specifically at
what happens after a flood happens.
We looked at the kind of mitigation measures in place.
That's what I'm interested in.
Yeah.
Is to try to avoid the problem being as bad.
Yeah. And because the principle-
Up front, yeah
... holds true, that our
Better work that's done ahead of an event.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
Obviously, you're going to manage the consequences better.
I guess we did a lot of work in this report and covered a lot of ground, but the
key message that we were trying to get across through this work is
it can be a hard sell for people in local government to invest in getting more
information when they're under all sorts of pressure.
But,
you're also talking about a flood risk that's changing.
So,
the key message in our report is the more councils can invest in understanding
their flood risks, understanding their impact , understanding the costs
of the current infrastructure, the better place they are to make those longer-term
decisions-
Yes
... around where they prioritize their spend.
But yeah, the idea behind it is understanding,
working with the communities to understand what are the values most critical to
those communities, and therefore-
Yes
... what's the priority for
if you need to build new infrastructure, what the priority for that is.
So it sounds like we know what we should do, but we're not doing it yet.
Well, I think what we found
with the thing that both councils had in common was this thing Ethan mentioned
about risk. Both of them do a pretty good job of
their modeling, understanding where waters go, but both of them need to
do more work to understand the consequences of different
events or potential events so that they can understand what values are being
compromised, so that they can make good decisions about what
priorities they want to protect and where they want to prioritize the spend.
Probably one area where the two councils we looked at might be slightly ahead of
other councils is that their hazard information is quite sophisticated.
So in terms of the modeling of where the water's going to go,
they have done that quite comprehensively for their regions.
And they also have done it taking into account different climate change
scenarios. So they know what flooding will look like now, but also in
100 years' time, 50 years' time for different scenarios.
So from that point of view, they've got quite good information.
But yeah, as Ivan said, not as much information or not an
entire picture about what impact that flooding might have on a
particular community.
Well, thank you. Lamona.
Thank you. Just following on from that, Cody.
So you've got a good report, you've got good information that
clearly can forecast or provide possible scenarios.
How is that then translated to the community in terms of the two
areas? Because once the community really understand, surely they can
have input and good consultation around if the
council makes a decision around investment, et cetera, you're needing the risk
management plan. How does all that connect?
Yeah.
Thanks for your question. So, that's one of the areas that we
highlighted as an area of improvement.
So,
in addition to the two councils we looked at
understanding flood risk a bit better, we also think that they could do a better
job of communicating that risk to communities.
So one of the things that we noticed is that there is some information out there.
So the hazard mapping is quite good. That's all publicized.
But,
the hazard mapping and then what
essentially the information about where flood protection is, is in two different
places
on council websites, which means that communities have to piece together bits and
pieces from different places, and it's not entirely clear, we don't think, at least
in an accessible way,
what the actual risk is to people
living in particular areas or working in particular areas,
which is quite important because
research indicates
that people can get quite complacent if
it's been a long time since a flood has occurred and they can't remember or weren't
around when the last impact happened.
People can also feel safer when there is a stop bank down the
road, for example, even if that stop bank might not be effective for
all types of risk.
So yeah, that's another important improvement that we highlighted.
A very quick sec. Thank you for the reply.
And I just wanted to ask a question around iwi in terms
of, we've heard quite a bit in terms of consultation in the
emergency management, and it was quite useful.
Is there anything in the report or that
each area raised in terms of the relationship with iwi, in terms of that
whole journey to the public and community consultation?
Yeah. We did speak to both councils about that.
The first thing to say is that
councils are only formally required to consult on
flood protection
levels of service when they decide to change those levels of
service. And,
that formal consultation for these two councils hasn't happened for a very long
time, so-
Oh, really
... maybe 25 to 30 years for each council.
They've kept the intended levels of service basically the same.
So formal consultation has occurred.
We did hear from both councils that they are engaging with iwi in their
areas, on river catchment
planning and flood protection, in some cases, kind of for discrete
areas, but not in a formal way.
There's a sup from Melissa, and then I think Mike's got a question, and then I'll
close it there.
Okay.
Thank you. It's a sup in relation to the question that
Andy actually, Mr. Foster-
Okay
... has actually asked in terms of the planning.
Your
comment saying that we have floods virtually
every
it's a perennial-
Year
... quite often. Quite often. And you were talking about
flood protection and the planning, and you've actually got the data to
actually sort of figure out... They've now got data to figure out where the floods
are going to, how it's going to happen or whatever.
Are they doing anything to change the planning system in terms
of where the properties and the buildings are actually going?
Because one of the things that I've actually noticed is that where there's
flooding in the suburbia, for example, the same
houses, same streets that have actually flooded once, floods again.
And there has been no mitigation. I mean, for example, in Auckland,
even in Mount Albert, streets that are actually really low and
it's been houses there that they've done nothing to actually-
Exactly the point
... do anything about those issues and it having
a-A business,
like a factory, and all of the
grasslands are actually covered in parking, concrete.
Everything's actually changed, so there's no soakage.
So everything that actually flows from the factory actually flows into
the houses that are actually on a lower-lying area.
And it seems council don't seem to even think about the lay of the
land when they actually permit these kinds of activities.
Are they doing anything about those?
So currently,
under the draft national policy statement for natural hazards, which is currently
being considered,
there is a
suggested requirement in there that councils take into account
natural hazard risk when they're planning new developments.
That
is not the case with the current system.
Councils aren't required to consider risk when they make decisions
about where flood protection infrastructure is going to go.
But that's something that we think that they should consider doing because
you're pointing to
what seems like, to most, common sense
logic, which is if you're going to build flood protection somewhere,
flood protection is extremely expensive.
You want to make sure that you're getting value for money for that spend.
There's no point building an enormous stopbank to protect it
because it's going to drain relatively quickly.
But it might make more sense to build it where there's a new development or
an existing development that seems to be flooding more frequently than it had been
before.
Yeah.
It would make sense to actually not build flood protection
infrastructure when you have better planning system where you're
actually not getting rid of soakage areas, where rain can actually go
around the drain.
Yeah, that's right. So those are challenging decisions
that councils have to make, but there are a lot of different ways that they can
mitigate risk to communities. Building stopbanks and flood pumps,
stuff like that, is one of them.
There are plenty of other things as well, more natural things like restoring
wetlands. There's a range of different things that they could consider.
But in order to decide which of those things to do, they need really good
information, not just about where the water's going, but what's going to happen
when it gets there. And that's the part that we think these two councils need to
improve, and we think all councils should consider.
Okay, we'll move to Mike for the last question.
Thank you.
You mentioned here that obviously councils can face litigation
risk if they don't meet their intended levels of services.
Obviously, councils, through proper process, can reduce
their levels of service to ensure they are meeting it,
which therefore does technically put community at risk.
What protections are in place to stop councils just
reducing their levels of service or having a low level of service that actually
still puts communities at risk?
Essentially, the process for changing levels of service requires
formal consultation and a change to long-term plans.
I'm unaware of any formal
things in place to mitigate that, but I guess they'd have to front up with their
communities and do it in an open and transparent way, and
whether they want to do that, that's a decision that individual councils will make.
But that seems to be
the key thing.
Great. Thank you. And thank you very much for that.
We've come to the end of our time.
Thank you.
We're going to be moving into private session, so thank you very much.